# Potential and pitfalls of eukaryotic metagenome skimming: A test case for lichens
Whole genome shotgun sequencing of multi species communities using only a single library layout is commonly used to assess taxonomic and functional complexities of large and diverse microbial communities. Here we investigate to what extent such metagenome skimming approaches are applicable for in-depth genomic characterizations of obligate symbiotic communities involving eukaryotes, e.g. lichens. Taking the sequencing study design into account, we address how to best assemble eukaryotic metagenome skimming data, what pitfalls can occur, and what genome quality can be expected from the data. To facilitate a project specific benchmarking, we introduce the concept of twin sets. These are simulated data resembling the outcome of a particular metagenome skimming study. We show that the quality of genome reconstructions from metagenome skimming data depends essentially on assembler choice. Individual tools, including the metagenome assemblers Omega and MetaVelvet, are surprisingly sensitive to low and uneven coverages. In combination with the common practice of empirical assembly parameter choice to maximize the assembly N50 value, their performance drop can culminate in precluding an entire genome from the assembly. In our benchmark setting, MIRA, an all-purpose overlap assembler consistently is least affected by varying coverage ratios for the sequenced organisms. The resulting genome reconstructions facilitate the identification of almost all genes annotated in the original data rendering them, in principle, suitable for high-resolution comparative genomics studies. Reconciling this expectation with the outcome of a real-world metagenome skimming of the lichen Lasallia pustulata indicates methodological problems causing the underrepresentation of one symbiont in the shotgun library.
